Add Fullscreen popups explainer and related doc (#140)
w3c/window-management: EXPLAINER_fullscreen_popups.md

> # Multi-Screen Window Placement on the Web - Creating Fullscreen Popup Windows

Reviewer: "Window Management on the Web"; update "placement" mentions and URLs throughout

## Introduction
This proposal aims to reduce user and developer friction for initiating a fullscreen experience on the desired display of a multi-screen device. The proposed web platform enhancement allows web applications to open a new window in HTML [fullscreen](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/) mode on a specific display with a single user gesture.

## Background
[Multi-Screen Window Placement](https://github.com/w3c/window-placement) is a new permission-gated web platform API that provides web applications with information about the device's connected screens, allowing them to open and position windows or request fullscreen on any of those screens.

The HTML living standard specifies [Tracking User Activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#tracking-user-activation), to gate some web platform APIs on user interaction signals. 

> ## Problem

Reviewer: This could mention that web apps wish to show fullscreen content on a specific display, alongside the original content, but target-display fullscreen makes the existing window otherwise inaccessible. (or similar)

Author: Added, with the addition of "may make the existing window inaccessible" since in-theory other browsers like Safari would still allow access to the original window.

Multiple partners and early adopters of the [Multi-Screen Window Placement API](https://w3c.github.io/window-placement/) have specifically requested the ability to show one or more fullscreen popups from a single user gesture, to avoid the user friction entailed with making separate gestures to create each window and make each window fullscreen. For example: 
*   [window.open should support the 'fullscreen' option](https://github.com/w3c/window-placement/issues/7)
*   [Feature Request: Initiate a multi-screen experience from a single user activation](https://github.com/w3c/window-placement/issues/98#top)
*   [Feature request: Fullscreen support on multiple screens](https://github.com/w3c/window-placement/issues/92).

## Goals

> The goal of this document is to outline the necessary spec changes that would permit web applications to open a new fullscreen window on a specific display, with only a single user gesture. It also aims to explore abuse and other security / privacy considerations. In particular this document focuses on introducing algorithmic changes to existing APIs to allow such behavior without introducing API surface changes.

Reviewer: Is the last sentence still pertinent? Should it say "straightforwardly extending existing API surfaces" or similar?

Author: Good catch! Re worded this sentence.

The [Initiating Multi-Screen Experiences Explainer](https://github.com/w3c/window-placement/blob/main/EXPLAINER_initiating_multi_screen_experiences.md) covers some related goals (i.e. launching N fullscreen windows on N displays) not covered in this proposal.

> ## Use Cases

Reviewer: Keep this in sync with more updated discussions and documents

Author: Oops, it seems this document was missing https://github.com/bradtriebwasser/fullscreen-popup/commit/35f643f3f27367f49eaf385a501e60a9e6ebf541. I re-merged that in this copy.

Some basic illustrative examples which may be achieved with this proposal are listed below:
*   Video streaming app launches a video directly to fullscreen on a separate display.
*   3D modeling app launches a preview in fullscreen on a separate display.

> Web applications may already [enter fullscreen on the current window and open a new (non-fullscreen) popup window on a different display with a single user gesture](https://w3c.github.io/window-placement/#usage-overview-initiate-multi-screen-experiences) (due to [this spec text](https://w3c.github.io/window-placement/#api-window-open-method-definition-changes)). By allowing fullscreen popups, this proposal effectively enables web applications to launch multiple fullscreen windows on multiple displays with a single user gesture. Some examples are listed below:

Reviewer: Is the intent to still support fullscreen popups as companion windows? There are some nuances around gesture consumption for fullscreen popups vs the internal slot for companion windows that should be clarified.

*   Financial app opens a fullscreen dashboard on the primary monitor and a fullscreen stock tracker window on a secondary display.
*   Virtual desktop app launches fullscreen windows on primary and secondary displays to mimic a remote monitor configuration.

> Furthermore, a web application could launch N fullscreen popup windows, as long as the user agent allows N popups from a user gesture (i.e. multiple popups allowed by popup blocker being disabled):

Reviewer: This is no longer true, if fullscreen popups consume a user gesture regardless of popup blocker config.

Author: See above. Fixed now.

window.open(url, '_blank', 'popup,fullscreen');
```

#### Opening a fullscreen popup on another display:
```js
const otherScreen = screenDetails.screens.find(s => s !== screenDetails.currentScreen);
window.open(url, '_blank', `left=${otherScreen.availLeft},` +
                            `top=${otherScreen.availTop},` +
                            `width=${otherScreen.availWidth},` +
                            `height=${otherScreen.availHeight},` + 
                            `fullscreen`);
```

### Spec Changes
The spec does not contain an exhaustive list of valid features in the `features` argument, however, the spec does contain procedures for determining if a [popup window is requested](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/window-object.html#popup-window-is-requested), and the specific `tokenizedFeatures` to look for. Following this model, the spec shall be updated to define a similar algorithm for checking if a **fullscreen window** is requested. A fullscreen window must also first be considered a popup window.

After [checking if a popup window is requested](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/window-object.html#popup-window-is-requested), add the following section:

> To **check if a fullscreen window is requested**, given _tokenizedFeatures_:

Reviewer: Keep this in sync with more updated discussions and documents (include fullscreen permission policy check).

Author: See above, I missed merging a commit that adjusted all of this.

4. Let _fullscreen_ be the result of [checking if a window feature is set](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/window-object.html#window-feature-is-set), given _tokenizedFeatures_, "`fullscreen`", and false.
5. If _fullscreen_ is false, then return false.
6. Let _permissionState_ be the result of [getting the current permission state](https://w3c.github.io/permissions/#dfn-getting-the-current-permission-state) given "`window-management`".
7. If _permissionState_ is "[granted](https://w3c.github.io/permissions/#dom-permissionstate-granted)", then return true.
8. Return false.

Add a Note below this algorithm which reads:
> User agents are encouraged to restore the user-agent-adjusted window.open() specified bounds, or their inferred defaults when a fullscreen popup exits fullscreen.

In [7.3.2 Browsing contexts](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#windows), insert a new list item after the [is popup](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#is-popup) item and its corresponding note. The new item should read: "An **is fullscreen** boolean, initially false." with an anchor of #is-fullscreen.

Add a note below the item which reads:

> > If **is fullscreen** is true, user agents should [requestFullscreen](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#dom-element-requestfullscreen) on the [browsing context’s ](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#browsing-context)active document [documentElement](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#dom-document-documentelement)

Reviewer: nit: move space from `[browsing context’s ]`  to ` active`

After step 12.1 in **[window open steps](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/nav-history-apis.html#window-open-steps)**, after "_Set targetNavigable's active browsing context's is popup to the result of [...]_", insert a step:

>  > Set targetNavigable's [active browsing context](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#nav-bc)'s is fullscreen to the result of [checking if a fullscreen window is requested](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/nav-history-apis.html#popup-window-is-requested), given tokenizedFeatures.

Reviewer: Mention fullscreen permission policy and header checks on the opened popup here?

Author: We aren't making any changes to that. Since the algorithm calls requestFullscreen, the existing codepath would already check the `fullscreen` permission and permission policy.

"is fullscreen" should link to the list item anchor (#is-fullscreen) added to [7.3.2 Browsing contexts](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#windows) as previously described.

#### Spec Notes

> [`window.open()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/window-object.html#dom-open-dev) Activation Consumption</strong>

Reviewer: Fix unmatched `</strong>`

*   [MDN Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/User_activation#transient_activation) describe [`window.open()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/window-object.html#dom-open-dev) as an example API which consumes the user activation.
*   A Chrome developer [blog post](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/user-activation/#how-does-user-activation-v2-work) describes [`window.open()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/window-object.html#dom-open-dev) as an example API which consumes the user activation.

Published specifications may need some corrective action, but that is outside the scope of this proposal. The proposal in this document makes the assumption that user agents <strong>may or may not</strong> consume the transient activation in [`window.open()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/window-object.html#dom-open-dev).

> ### Open questions

Reviewer: nit: blank line below

#### **Overlapping Fullscreen Windows**
This proposal does not define behavior for certain scenarios which should be considered by user agents implementing the proposal:
*   Opening a fullscreen popup on a display which already contains a fullscreen window.
*   Opening a fullscreen popup on the same display as the opener, which may or not be fullscreen.
*   Pre-existing protections prevent placing popups over fullscreen
    *   Chrome exits fullscreen (see [ForSecurityDropFullscreen](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:content/public/browser/web_contents.h?q=ForSecurityDropFullscreen))
    *   Firefox exits fullscreen
    *   Safari opens the popup in a separate fullscreen space

> 

Reviewer: nit: remove extra blank line

#### **Other fullscreen windowss**
This proposal requires that a new fullscreen window must first be also considered a popup window. Future enhancements may consider allowing other types of windows to be opened in fullscreen.

#### **Fullscreen Exit Behavior**
The proposed note specifies that user agents are encouraged to restore the window to specified bounds after fullscreen exits. Some alternative examples include: Closing the window, restoring to a popup with bounds expanded to each edge of the display.

#### **Asynchronous behavior**
`Element.requestFullscreen()` returns a promise that resolves after the element becomes fullscreen, but Window.open() does not return a promise. Web applications

> would need alternative methods of detecting when the window is open, ready and fullscreen.

Reviewer: nit: fix line breaks here and in `fullscreenchange event` below

This is partially mitigated by gating this feature on the "`window-management`" permission. Users should only grant permissions for [powerful features](https://w3c.github.io/permissions/#dfn-powerful-feature) to web applications that they trust.

This could also be mitigated further by having the user agent show a fullscreen bubble when the user first interacts with the cross-display fullscreen window or by showing a bubble on the screen where the user activation took place (i.e. "Window went fullscreen on display ###"), or both. In these scenarios, there is a higher confidence that the user will see a fullscreen bubble.

## Privacy Considerations
This feature does not expose any information to sites, and there are no privacy considerations to note beyond those already documented in the Multi-Screen Window Placement [Privacy Considerations](https://www.w3.org/TR/window-placement/#privacy) section. The feature is gated behind the "`window-management`" permission, so it does not expose any information outside what is already available from the API when permission is granted.

> ## Alternatives Considered

Reviewer: nit: add a blank line below

### Keep the existing behavior.
Web applications can create a popup window that fills the available display bounds, as a poor substitute of HTML fullscreen. However, this contains window borders and decorations not appropriate for some use cases.

### Allow a *target-screen* fullscreen request after opening a *cross-screen* popup.
*   Requires more complex changes to user activation signals, which has several consequences:
    *   Requires the user agent to maintain transient user activation signal(s) on one or more frames (the opener and/or the new window and its descendant frames).
    *   Less straightforward, which could reduce adoption.

>     *   Propagating a transient user activation signal to a new popup or otherwise relaxing the user activation requirements for [`element.requestFullscreen()`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#ref-for-dom-element-requestfullscreen%E2%91%A0)in this scenario would likely raise significant additional concerns. 

Reviewer: nit: space after link, before 'in'

*   Less ergonomic for application developers.
    *   A web developer would need to manually call [`element.requestFullscreen()`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#ref-for-dom-element-requestfullscreen%E2%91%A0) from within the popup after it has loaded, or call [`element.requestFullscreen()`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#ref-for-dom-element-requestfullscreen%E2%91%A0) from the opener’s script after calling [`window.open()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/window-object.html#dom-open-dev). Both versions would require different user activation signal propagation strategies as mentioned above.

### Allow fullscreen capability delegation to the new window after creating a popup.

> Utilize [capability delegation](https://wicg.github.io/capability-delegation/spec.html) to allow the opener window to delegate fullscreen capabilities to the new popup window via` window.postMessage()`. This currently does not work since `window.open()` consumes the transient user activation which prevents capability delegation as outlined in the following example:

Reviewer: Remove the mention of an example, or add an example

## Goals
The goal of this document is to outline the necessary spec changes that would permit web applications to open a new fullscreen window on a specific display, with only a single user gesture. It also aims to explore abuse and other security / privacy considerations. In particular this document focuses on introducing straightforward API surface and corresponding algorithmic changes to allow such behavior.

The [Initiating Multi-Screen Experiences Explainer](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/blob/main/EXPLAINER_initiating_multi_screen_experiences.md) covers some related goals (i.e. launching N fullscreen windows on N displays) not covered in this proposal.

## Use Cases
Some basic illustrative examples which may be achieved with this proposal are listed below:
*   Video streaming app launches a video directly to fullscreen on a separate display.
*   3D modeling app launches a preview in fullscreen on a separate display.
*   Medical report app opens imagery fullscreen on a specialized display.
*   Point-of-sale app opens a fullscreen payment window on a customer display.

> This proposal is limited to launching at most one fullscreen popup onto one display. [Future enhancements](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/blob/main/EXPLAINER_initiating_multi_screen_experiences.md) could allow a web application could launch N fullscreen popup windows to allow for more use cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal is limited to launching at most one fullscreen popup onto one display, given a single transient user activation. [Future enhancements](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/blob/main/EXPLAINER_initiating_multi_screen_experiences.md) could allow a web application to launch multiple fullscreen popup windows from a single transient user activation, to allow for more use cases:

```
